The Project Gutenberg EBook of Vapaaviikolla, by Arvi Karisto

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Vapaaviikolla
       Kuvaus 3:ssa näytöksessä

Author: Arvi Karisto

Release Date: January 21, 2008 [EBook #24381]

Language: Finnish

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VAPAAVIIKOLLA ***




Produced by Tapio Riikonen






VAPAAVIIKOLLA

Näytelmä kolmessa kuvauksessa


Kirjoitti

ARVI K. [ARVI KARISTO]


Boman ja Karlsson, Hämeenlinna, 1901.



HENKILÖT:

Isontalon Samppa.
Kaaperi  |  renkimiehiä.
Tahvana  |
Kelolan Kalle.
Hänen äitinsä.
Nimismies.




ENSIMÄINEN NÄYTÖS.


Näyttämö: Maanteiden risteys, josta kolme eri tietä erkanee.
Tienosoittaja keskellä. Taustana metsää. -- Illan hämärä.

ISONTALON SAMPPA JA KAAPERI:

Laulavat etäämpänä oikealla kunnes laulun keskikohtaan päästyä astuvat
näyttämölle. Kaaperilla on hanuri kainalossa, Sampalla kädet housun
taskuihin työnnettynä.

    Ja tämän kylän pojat ne laulelevat,
    Että tuli tali rullan teilaa
    Jotta kuinkahan oisi
    Ja tokkohan voisi
    Olla keyrinä ilman heilaa.

(Kaksi ensimäistä ja kolme viimeistä säettä kerrotaan.) (Samppa
seisahtuu, keskeyttää laulun ja silmäilee ympärilleen; Kaaperi jatkaa)

    Ja tämän kylän pojat ne laulelevat,
    Että haituli rullan taalaa
    Ja niinköhän...

SAMPPA (Keskeyttää Kaaperin.) Kas tässä Kaaperi, istutaanpas hetkiseksi
vuottamaan Tahvanaa.

KAAPERI: Niin oikein, istutaan, (istuvat.) Ja minä vedän saksanpolkan
sellaisen että kuuluu aina Kukkolan kujille. -- Vedänkö?

SAMPPA: Sen sinä voit tehdä. Sittempä kuulevat Kukkolan tytöt, että
Isontalon miehet ovat liikkeellä!

    (Kaaperi soittaa. Samppa täyttää piippuaan).

SAMPPA (Kaaperin tauottua.) Niin se käy kuin flöötistä vaan!

KAAPERI: Se on selvä se. -- Mutta kuulehan Samppa! Simolan Jussi tiesi
eilenillalla kertoa, että Alitalon Jeremias se nyt hyväilee sitä
Kukkolan Katria.

SAMPPA: Jeremias? Katria?

KAAPERI: Juuri se. Jeremias itse oli sanonut, vieläpä kerskunut, että
Kelolan Kalle sitä nyt saa katsella syrjästäpäin miten Kukkolan Katria
viedään.

SAMPPA: Äläshän! Kyll' se on kukkoa se, sanon minä! Jeremias sitä ei
tule ikänään saamaan; meidän kylään pitää Katrin joutua. Ja Kelolan
Kalle on siksi kunnon mies, että kyllä ansaitsee sellaisen tytön. Ei
sitä Jeremias vaan noin ikään nuolase!

KAAPERI: Sen minä sanoin heti, että hyvällä sitä ei kuitenkaan
hellitetä. Ja Tahvanan kanssa me jo juttelimme, että pitäisi sitä käydä
Jeremiasta tänäiltana hieman noin niinkuin löylyttämässä!

SAMPPA: Se tehdään! Ja annetaankin oikein isän kädestä. Minulla on
vielä sille roistolle vanhatkin maksamatta. Muistatko miten se
Juhannuskokolla varpailleni sotki, muistatko?

KAAPERI: Muistan, muistan. Ja muistampa sen silmäyksenkin jonka hän
sinuun heitti.

SAMPPA (Nousee innostuneena.) Lähdetäänkö heti?

KAAPERI: Kumpahan vain tulisi se Tahvana.

SAMPPA: Niinpä niin, joukko meidän täytyy etsiä, kahdessa miehessä
sinne ei ole mentävä.

KAAPERI: Joukko tietysti. Kelolan Kalle kuitenkin pitäisi joukkoon
saada. Se poika sitä pusertaa vaikka koko kylän kasaan, jos vaan
saataisi se ensin suuttumaan. Kumpa saataisi se pistämään liiviinsä
pari hyvää naukkua, niin silloin, minä takaan sen, että Kukkolan kylän
poikien tukka pöllyisi -- pöllyisipä komeastikin!

SAMPPA: Koetetaanhan. Luulempa, että se ei ole vaikeatakaan, kunhan
asian oikean laidan kuulee.

TAHVANA (Laulu alkaa kuulua etäämpää.)

    "Eikä mun henkeni viinalle haise.
    Eikä tupakillenkaan.
    Vaan se haisee kuin herrain henki
    Saksan samppanjalle vaan!"

(Kertauksen aikana astuu Tahvana pullo kädessä, toinen taskussa, vähän
hoiperrellen näyttämölle).

SAMPPA (Laulun aikana.) Hyvinpä on Tahvana onnistunut matkallaan,
kuulemma. Mutta hyvään ne ovat nyt viinat tarpeesenkin.

TAHVANA (Laulun loputtua.) Hei pojat! Iloitkaa ja riemuitkaa nyt kun on
ilon aika. (Antaa pullot ja rahat taskustansa Sampalle.) Kas tässä
Samppa. Tallus-Maija oli saakulin kitsaalla tuulella; ei antanut kuin
nämä kaksi pulloa, vaikka viitosen olisin hellittänyt.

SAMPPA: No riittäneehän sitä tästäkin ensialuksi. (Ryyppää) Ääh, se on
poikaa se! (Tarjoo Kaaperille.) Maista Kaaperi!

KAAPERI: (Ryypättyään antaa pullon Tahvanalle.) Nyt Tahvana lähdemme
Kukkolan poikia helssaamaan! Minä käyn Kelolassa kutsumassa Kallea.

TAHVANA: Ettäkö Jeremiasta löylyyttämään.

SAMPPA: Juuri sitä, silakan kuristajaa. Opetetaan miestä rupeamaan
toisten heiloja hyväilemään.

TAHVANA: Se on oikein se; juuri kuin minun suustani sanottu.

KAAPERI (On astunut muutaman askeleen vasemmalle.) Aah, katsokaahan,
tuoltapa tuleekin Kelolan Kalle juuri kuin käsketty. (Huutaa) Hoi mies!
Jouduhan tänne!

KELOLAN KALLE (Kookas nuorukainen, tulee vasemmalta.) Mikä hätä?

SAMPPA: Morjensta Kalle! Terve mieheen!

KALLE: Terve, terve! (Kättelee kutakin) Minnekä miehet nyt matkalla?

SAMPPA: He Kukkolaan näet! Sinne sinun hempukkasi kosijaa tervehtimään.

KALLE: Mitä tarkoitat?

SAMPPA: Mitäkö tarkoitan? Olethan kuin eilen kylään tullut. Lienetkö
kuullutkaan että Alitalon Jeremias se siellä nyt sinun morsiantasi
hyväilee?

KALLE (Ihmeissään.) Alitalon Jeremias?

SAMPPA: Juuri sama köntys.

KALLE: Ja suostuuko häneen Katri?

SAMPPA: Sitä emme tiedä. Mutta siitä huolimatta aiomme mennä
Jeremiaalle muistuttamaan mitä hänen rauhaansa sopii. Tuletko mukaan?

KALLE: Tappeluunko aiotte?

SAMPPA: Tappeluun ja tuimaan!

KALLE: En sitten. Minä en osaa tapella, enkä tahdo tappelulla sovintoa
saada. Ja eiköhän vain lienekin ilkeätä panettelua koko juttu.

SAMPPA: Epäiletkö minun sanojani?

KALLE: En oikein osaa uskoakaan.

KAAPERI: Minä vakuutan sinulle Kalle, se on täyttä totuutta. Jeremias
itse sitä on Simolan Jussille kehunut, vieläpä oli irnunut, että sinä
muka saat vain kauniisti katsella, kun hän Katria taluttaa. Ja totta
tosiaan, niinpä näyt tahtovankin, et omaasi välitä puolustaa. En olisi
luullut sinua Kalle noin löyhämieliseksi.

TAHVANA (On saanut Sampalta pullon ja istuutunut kivelle sitä
maistelemaan; hyräilee puoliääneen veltosti.) Ja vaikk' olen köyhistä
vanhemmista, olen ison talon renki j.n.e.

KALLE (Kävelee edestakaisin, katse maahan luotuna; puhelee itsekseen.)
Ettäköhän todellakin olisi...? Ja suostuisiko siihen Katri sitten...?
Hmh ... hmh...

SAMPPA: Niin Kalle, niin on asiat, varo vain ettei lintu lennä
käsistäsi. Hullusti käy sinun, ellet ajoissa tahdo näyttää mikä
oikeastaan olet miehiäsi. Minä takaan sen, Kalle, että hyvän
löylytyksen kun annamme, niin Jeremiaalle, kuin koko Kukkolan joukolle,
minä takaan, ettei heidän uudelleen tee mielensä tunkea puun ja kuoren
väliin, ei ainakaan tämän kylän poikien hilsuja lähentelemään. -- Mitäs
tuumaat Kalle?

    (Kalle ei vastaa.)

KAAPERI: Älä suotta surkeile Kalle. Lähde mukaan, kun kerran oma asiasi
kysymyksessä on. Lähde ja annetaampa niille kelvottomille oikein reiman
pojan kädestä.

SAMPPA (Tarjoaa Kallelle pulloa.) Heh, maista tästä, kyllä se pelon
mielestä karkoittaa.

    (Kalle ei ota; on yhä ajatuksissaan.)

KAAPERI: Tosiaankin Kalle, mitä oikeastaan tuumaat? Oletko niin kehno
mieheksi, että annat minkälaisen rähmäkäpälän hyvänsä henttuasi
lähennellä ilman ettet koetakaan estää? Mitä tuumaat?

SAMPPA (Yhä tarjoten.) Kelpaako jumalanvilja?

KAAPERI: No ota kun mies olet, ja miehen kirjoissa kulkea tahdot. Ota!

KALLE (Hetken vielä epäiltyään, ottaa pullon.) Minä otan ja juon
(kiivastuneena) ja sitten tappelen! (Ryyppää.) Minä tahdon näyttää
niille lurjuksille, että vielä sitä ei Kelolan Kallea niin vaan penkin
alle pistetä. Eei!

    (Antaa pullon takaisin Sampalle.)

SAMPPA: Juo toki niinkuin mies juo -- älä niinkuin kana. Tuskin
kieltäsi kastoit. -- Juo!

KALLE (Ryyppää uudestaan.) Ja hetikö lähdemme? Minun vereni kuohuu, en
enää malta odottaa.

KAAPERI: Lähdetään, lähdetään. Ja minä toivon Kalle, ettäs pöllytät
Jeremiaan pitkää tukkaa niin, että se on pöllytetty.

KALLE: (Yhä innoissaan) Sen tiedät Kaaperi! Kirkas tuli ja leimaus!
(Puree hammastaan, puistaa nyrkkejään.) Olisipa tässä nyt Jeremias,
niin tuhaksi hänet jauhaisin! Mutta vieläpä hänet tapaan. Minä vakuutan
sinulle Kaaperi, että tänäiltana Alitalon nurkat soivat ja pihtipielet
paukkuvat.

SAMPPA: Oikein Kalle! Sinähän jo laskettelet kuin aikamies. Ryyppy
vielä ja sitten lähdetään. (Tarjoo Kallelle, joka ryyppää). Vielä kun
saamme Simolan Jussin ja Päistärin Heikin joukkoomme, silloin emme
pelkää vaikka tulisi pataljoona turkkilaisia vastaamme. -- Lähdetään
pojat!

KAAPERI: Lähdetään, lähdetään!

KALLE: Vaikka tulisi piikkipäisiä keihäitä, minä en pelkää, en niin
totta kuin olen Kelolan Kalle!

(Lähtevät perälle johtavaa tietä, Kalle yhä hampaitaan rouskien ja
nyrkkejään puistaen, Kaaperi hanurinsa hakoja kiinni sovitellen ja
Samppa pulloa taskuunsa työntäen. Tahvana mennessään alkaa laulaa
renkuttaa, johon toiset heti yhtyvät.)

    Ja eikä ne pelkää tämän kylän pojat.
    Vaikka sataisi sarvipäitä!...

(Näitä säkeitä kerratessa, putoaa esirippu, kun jo kaikki näyttämöltä
ovat poistuneet. -- Sävel tähän, kuten edellisiinkin on -- sitä
tavallista).




TOINEN NÄYTÖS.


Näyttämö sama kuin edellisessäkin. Pimeä yö. -- Kelolan Kallen äiti
tulee, huivi hartioille käärittynä, vasemmalta.

ÄITI (Seisahtaa tienristeykseen ja katselee ympärilleen; surua ja
pelkoa ilmaisevalla äänellä.) Missä viipyneekään Kalle? Puoliyö jo on
ohitse ja sitä poikaparkaa ei vain kuulu kotiinpalaavaksi. Lukutupaan
mennäkseen hän nyt, kuten niin usein ennenkin lähti, mutta koskaan hän
ei näin myöhään ole viipynyt. Minua niin hirveästi pelottaa. Ääni
rinnassani sanoo, että jokin onnettomuus on poikaani, omaa rakasta
Kalleani kohdannut. Se ääni, se ei anna minulle lepoa, ei rauhaa. Minun
täytyy etsiä häntä, täytyy löytää hänet... (Katselee hetken vaanivasti
ympärilleen.) Kalle parka! Etteipä vain olisi joutunut noiden kurjien
vapaaviikon viettäjien joukkoon. Oi! Minun sydämeni on haljeta
ajatellessani sitä. Vain yhden ainoan kerran hän on päissään ollut ja
valansa mukaan myöskin viimeisen. Jospa vain Jumala soisi hänelle
voimia pysymään päätöksessään, pysymään erillään noista tuhannesti
kirotuista väkijuomista. -- Oih, voi! Mistä löytänenkään hänet -- niin
mistä. (Lähtee kävelemään oikealle). Löytää minun hänet kuitenkin
täytyy, ennen ei äidinsydämeni saa lepoa, ei rauhaa. (Menee).

    (Näyttämö hetken -- puolisen minuuttia tyhjänä).

KALLE (Tulee perältä, revityin vaattein, avopäin ja hyvin
kauhistuneena. Hiipii varovasti, katselee pelokkaasti, vaanivasti
ympärilleen, seisahtuu tienristeykseen.) -- Oi minua onnetonta! (Vaipuu
kivelle istumaan.) Mikä onneton sattuma minut johti tähän kurjaan
joukkoon? (Pöyristää.) Huuh! Niin, juuri tässä heidät tapasin, tässä
seisoin joku tunti takaperin puhtaana, selkeänä ja kaikkia pirullisia
aikeita vailla. Ja nyt ... nyt olen... Oi voi, minä kauhistun itseäni.
(Vapisee tuskasta). Minä olen -- murhaaja! Olen ihmisveren vuodattaja!
Huuh! (Vaikeroi.) Oi minua onnetonta! Olen kurjin olento maanpäällä ...
olen oman onneni surmaaja... Olen kunnotoin ihmislapseksi! Oi äiti!
Niin äiti... Mitä sanoneekaan hän? Hän, joka minua niin hellästi
rakastaa, joka ikäni kaiken on minua kurjaa vaalinut, hoitanut, minua
oikealle ohjata koettanut ilon ja turvan vanhuuden varaksi minusta
kurjasta saadakseen... Oi minua! (Painaa kädet kasvoilleen.) Oi laupias
Jumala! Miksi annoit tämän kaiken tapahtua... Miksi? Miksi? --

    (Äänettömyys.)

ÄITI (Tulee hetkisen kuluttua oikealta.) Ei näy Kallea, ei kuulu
poikaani. Pimeä on talo, mihin hän lähti; siellä hän ei ole, mutta
jossakin, jossakin hänen täytyy olla. Niin jossakin, -- mutta missä,
missä?

KALLE (On kuin kivettynyt katsellut äitiään, nousee ja lausuu sydäntä
vihlovalla äänellä.) Tässä äiti! Tässä on sinun kurja poikasi, kelvoton
ja kunnoton huoliesi ja vaivojesi palkitsija! Oi äiti! Minä olen
onnettomin ihminen, minä olen kurjin, kiittämättömin olento, mitä maa
päällänsä kantaa, minä olen ... olen murhaaja!

ÄITI (Kauhistuen.) Murhaaja!

    (Vaipuu voimatonna maahan).

(Esirippu laskee).




KOLMAS NÄYTÖS.


Näyttämö: Tupa Kelolan talossa.

Äiti istuu penkillä, pää käsien nojalla, nyyhkien; nenäliina on hänellä
kädessään, johonka silloin tällöin pyyhkii silmiään. -- Kalle istuu
penkillä ikkunan kohdalla. Hänen kalpeilla kasvoillaan kuvastuu häpeä,
omantunnon tuska ja katumus.

Syvin hiljaisuus vallitsee tuvassa, ainoastaan äidin nyyhkytykset sitä
häiritsevät.

Hetkisen kuluttua alkaa pihalta kuulua aisakellon ääni ja hevosen
seisaus portaitten eteen.

ÄITI (Hypähtää kiireesti ylös; epätoivoisesti.) Jumalan tähden...! Nyt
ne tulevat...

KALLE (Kalpenee entistään kalpeammaksi, heittää hätäisen katseen äitiin
ja ikkunasta ulos ja istuu jälleen entiseen asentoonsa.)

ÄITI (Painautuu jälleen istumaan, huokaa kuuluvasti hoih! ja jää
katsomaan, tylsästi tuijottaen, oveen.)

    (Hetkinen taasen hiljaisuutta.)

NIMISMIES (Virkapuvussaan, astuu sisään.) Hyvää päivää!

    (Kumpikaan ei vastaa. Äidin itku käy yhä äänekkäämmäksi).

NIMISMIES (Mahtipontisesti.) Lain käsi on ankara ja ikäväkseni tulee
minun käyttää sitä teitä kohtaan. Te tiedätte mitä on tapahtunut ja
sinä Kalle, tunnustatko, että tappelussa eilenillalla Kukkolan
Alitalossa löit talon poikaa Jeremiasta halolla niin, että hän
saamastaan lyönnistä heti kuoli.

    (Kalle ei vastaa, on kuin ennenkin.)

NIMISMIES: Tunnustatko?

KALLE (Hetkisen vaitioltuaan, vitkaan.) Tunnustan.

NIMISMIES: Tiedätkö myös mikä on seuraus rikoksestasi, joka
kamaluudessaan ei ole viime aikoina vertojaan nähnyt; rikoksesta, jolla
olet rikkonut Jumalaa, esivaltaa, lähimmäisiäsi ja vanhempiasi vastaan?

KALLE (Katse yhä alas luotuna, hitaasti.) Vankila.

NIMISMIES: Niin; vankilassa tulee sinun sovittaa tämä kauhea rikoksesi.
Sen vuoksi siis seuraa minua.

    (Astuu askeleen Kallea kohti).

ÄITI (Herää yht'äkkiä tajuntaansa, heittäytyy nimismiehen eteen
sanomattomassa tuskassa.) Ei, ei! Jumalan tähden älkää tehkö sitä,
älkää koskeko häneen, älkää viekö minulta ainoata poikaani, turvaani!
-- Oi! Te ette voi tuntea äidin sydämen kärsimyksiä kun hänen lapsensa
viedään häneltä. Mutta minä ne tunnen ... tunnen tällä hetkellä ja voin
vakuuttaa, että ne ovat hirveitä... Oi! Säälikää minua, säälikää meitä,
Jumalan tähden, säälikää...!

NIMISMIES: Emäntä hyvä, minä tiedän teidän tuskanne, mutta minä en voi
tehdä mitään lieventääkseni sitä. Olen esivallan palvelia ja esivalta
vaatii ankaraa kuuliaisuutta. Poikanne on tehnyt kamalan rikoksen ja
laki vaatii sen rankaisemista.

ÄITI: Mutta hänhän ei ollut täydellä järjelläkään tuota tekoa
tehdessään. Hän oli viinasta hurjistunut.

NIMISMIES: Sitä pahempi; asiaa se ei laisinkaan lievennä. Onhan hän jo
siksi ijäkäs, että pitäisi ymmärtää varoa itsensä väkijuomista.

ÄITI: Oi poikani! (Heittäytyy Kallen rinnoille. Itkien.) Oi Kalle,
Kalle! Mikä saattoikaan sinut niiden kehnojen ja kurjien juomarien
joukkoon? Mikä saattoi sinut tekemään näin kauheata tekoa? Niin ...
(Hetkisen ajatuksissaan; pontevasti) viina, viina, tuo kirottu viina.
Viinan vaikutuksesta sinä teit rikoksesi, tuon rikoksen, jota
sovittamaan sinua kärsimiselläsi vaaditaan. (Kääntyen nimismiehen
puoleen, toisella kädellä pidellen Kallea kädestä, toinen uhkaavasti
ojennettuna nimismiestä kohden.) -- Ja kuka se on, joka vaatii tätä
kärsimystä? -- Esivalta, se sama esivalta, joka sallii valmistaa,
vapaasti myydä ja nauttia tuota kirousta tuottavaa nestettä, sitä
nestettä, joka tekee siivon, säyseän nuorukaisen villipedoksi, joka
yllyttää ihmiset toisiansa vastaan, joka saattaa tuhoa, enempi kuin
mikään mahti maailmassa aikaan.

NIMISMIES: Emäntä hyvä, älkää kiivastuko. Älkää soimatko esivaltaa, se
on kyllä kaikki parhaaksemme säätänyt. Poikanne on tehnyt rikoksen,
hänen tulee siis myös rangaistuksensa kärsiä.

KALLE (Irroittaa kätensä äidin kädestä.) Niin äiti, minä olen tehnyt
rikoksen, tahdon sen seuraukset myös kärsiä. Lohduttakaa te äiti
itseänne sillä tiedolla, että te ette ole syypää tähän. Kunnollisesti
olette minua kasvattanut, hoitanut ja vaalinut, mutta kunnottomasti
olen itse käyttäytynyt. Antakaa se minulle anteeksi äiti, minulle
kurjalle, kiittämättömällä pojallenne...

ÄITI (Itkee, nenäliina silmien edessä; koko ruumiinsa tuskasta
vavahtelee.)

NIMISMIES: (Astuu Kallen luokse, joka ojentaa kätensä, ja pistää niihin
käsiraudat.)

KALLE: (Tekee lähtöä. Katsoo äitiin anteeksianovasti, murtuneena.)
Hyvästi äiti! -- Hyvästi -- -- --

    (Menee nimismiehen keralla.)

ÄITI. (Ottaa nenäliinan silmiltään.) Oi Kalle, Kalle! (Astuu pari
askelta, ojentaa kätensä Kallen jälkeen; epätoivoisena, sydäntä
särkevällä äänellä.) Oi! Minun poikani!

    (Vaipuu taintuneena lattialle.)

Esirippu laskee.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Vapaaviikolla, by Arvi Karisto

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VAPAAVIIKOLLA ***

***** This file should be named 24381-8.txt or 24381-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/3/8/24381/

Produced by Tapio Riikonen

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
